# chemeng-final-project
Static Soft Sensor and Decision Support Models: Product Purity Deviation Detection and Reflux Ratio Adjustment


## Project Overview
This project develops a two-hidden-layer neural network soft sensor for a debutanizer that predicts distillate purity deviation from the 99.5 mol% polymer-grade specification. In addition, it develops a complementary binary decision support tool that recommends when corrective reflux action should be taken based on steady-state process variables.


## Project Objective
The ability to consistently produce a distillate purity of 99.5 mol % is complicated by feed disturbances that shift operating conditions, while online gas chromatography analyzers report updated compositions every 3 to 15 minutes. Thus, to address the delay, this project uses simulation-generated data and machine learning models to help estimate process behavior more quickly and support decision-making.

## Project Approach
A steady-state debutanizer column was modeled in DWSIM using a ternary hydrocarbon mixture. Data was generated by varying operating conditions through sensitivity studies covering a range of feed disturbances. The resulting dataset was used to train machine learning models for prediction and classification tasks related to purity control.



## Repository Structure
1. `README.md` - project description and setup instructions
2. `main.py` - main Python script
3. `requirements.txt` - required Python packages
4. `Model_Data.xlsx` - project training data

## Data Preparation
1. Download data file from either the Final Project assignment in Canvas or this repository.
2. Download Model_Data.xlsx and main.py to the same folder, so the python script can run without modifying the file path. Also, ensure file name of excel data is set to 'Model_Data.xlsx', as this is what is written in python script.

## How to Run
This project uses Python and requires the packages listed in `requirements.txt`.

Install them with:
pip install -r requirements.txt

Finally, the entire python script can then be executed.

